[@doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1008060]


As the field of traditional genomics rapidly expands its sequencing technologies and translational abilities, novel applications of genomic data are starting to arise in addressing disease burden. 

Beginning with the completion of the Human Genome Project in 2003, increased interest in catalouging genomic data spurred the innovation of massively parallel, chip-based genotyping arrays. Leveraging these technologies, early researchers were able to characterize and catalogue gene variants across millions of individuals internationally. In particular, the advent of projects such as the International HapMap Project or the 1000 Genomes Project sought to document haplotype structure (i.e. gene variants) involved in specific diseases of the human genome. As such, the gross information of nucleotide polymorphisms within publicly available databases has rapidly increased in the beginning of the 21st century with the rise in omics sequencing capabilities[reference?]. This genomic information, coupled with additional high resolution marks for other individual biological variants (e.g. transcripts, epigenetic marks, metabolites) has been touted to further complement precision medicine approaches using genetics. 

Complementing the rapid growth in our understanding of gene variants in the human genome was the emergence of using statistical techniques, formalized as genome-wide association studies (GWAS), to identify gene variants associated with common human diseases. From a population perspective, GWA studies, first conducted in (Year), have sought to discern genetic connections to various phenotypes by studying genotypic variation at biallelic markers across the human genome [references in VGMED grant gwas paragraph]. This technical revolution in the field of genomic medicine fueled our progressing capabilities to map associations of gene variants with disease on an increasingly granular level to individual single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). 

Such non-candidate driven GWA studies consider gene variations (i.e. SNPs, deletions, intertions, CNVs) to resulting phenotype values to ultimately report allele frequency differences among a case and control group in the form of an odds ratio. A manhattan plot, a common visualization format, displays the strength of association of certain genetic ‘hits’ with a phenotype of interest, benchmarked against a computed chi-square p-value threshold. Knowledge bases stored in archival repositories such as the GWAS catalog [referece] capture tens of thousands of genetic associations with respective biological and disease traits. Nonetheless while GWA studies successfully capture population-level insights, such literature lacks specificity on the individual instead of the population and has been the focus of multiple research studies in this post-GWAS era to better capture individual genomic risk factor nuances byeond an odds ratio [ reference moore paper].

In tamdem with the movement towards precision medicine, the post-GWAS era strives to bring such population level associations into individual-level metrics actionable in health delivery clinical settings. Importantly, Polygenic Risk Scores (PRS) have been developed at the individual level to ____ by placing unique weights on a selection of SNPs from the GWAS. [put in PRS equation]. [I.e. we pick a threshold possibly lower than the GWAS manhattan plot and weight those w Betas. Explain the formula for the PRS . this is what it does and why it was made in the first place.]


[This is just one way, the most basic. many have tried to reformulate the PRS in various ways.]

[cite common ones. Which ones are most common GRS scores?]


[In this study we aim to reformulate the PRS score with MDR reduction to better detect GxG interactions. MDR as a form of feature engineering the proper encoding for detecting GxG interactions]

[explain more technical details of MDR]

"Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction (MDR) has been widely applied to detect gene-gene (GxG) interactions associated with complex diseases. We propose an Aggregated-Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction (A-MDR) method that exhaustively searches for and detects significant GxG interactions to generate an epistasis enriched gene network"


END OF INTRO -> rest is all methods & performing MDR



